Discovery and species

Cast of the holotype humerus
The first Quetzalcoatlus fossils were discovered 
in Texas, United States, from the Maastrichtian 
Javelina Formation at Big Bend National Park (dated 
to around 68 million years ago[2]) in 1971 by Douglas 
A. Lawson, a geology graduate student from the Jackson 
School of Geosciences at the University of Texas at 
Austin. The specimen consisted of a partial wing 
(in pterosaurs composed of the forearms and elongated 
fourth finger), from an individual later estimated at 
over 10 m (33 ft) in wingspan.[3]

Lawson discovered a second site of the same age, about 
40 km (25 mi) from the first, where between 1972 and 1974 
he and Professor Wann Langston Jr. of the Texas Memorial 
Museum unearthed three fragmentary skeletons of much smaller 
individuals. Lawson in 1975 announced the find in an article 
in Science.[4] That same year, in a subsequent letter to the 
same journal, he made the original large specimen, TMM 41450-3, 
the holotype of a new genus and species, Quetzalcoatlus northropi. 
The genus name refers to the Aztec feathered serpent god, 
Quetzalcoatl. The specific name honors John Knudsen Northrop, 
the founder of Northrop, who drove the development of large 
tailless flying wing aircraft designs resembling Quetzalcoatlus.[5]


Skeletal reconstruction of Q. lawsoni.
At first it was assumed that the smaller specimens were juvenile 
or subadult forms of the larger type. Later, when more remains 
were found, it was realized they could have been a separate species. 
This possible second species from Texas was provisionally referred 
to as a Quetzalcoatlus sp. by Alexander Kellner and Langston in 1996, 
indicating that its status was too uncertain to give it a full new 
species name.[6] The smaller specimens are more complete than the Q. 
northropi holotype, and include four partial skulls, though they are 
much less massive, with an estimated wingspan of 5.5 m (18 ft).[7] 
This species was named Q. lawsoni in 2021, 
named after the genus' original describer.[1]


A life size restoration of Q. northropi at The Field Museum in Chicago.
The holotype specimen of Q. northropi has not been properly 
described and dignosed until 2021[1] and until then the status 
of the genus Quetzalcoatlus was identified as problematic. 
Mark Witton and colleagues (2010) noted that the type species 
of the genus—the fragmentary wing bones comprising Q. 
northropi—represent elements which are typically considered 
undiagnostic to generic or specific level, and that this complicates 
interpretations of azhdarchid taxonomy. For instance, Witton et al. 
(2010) suggested that the Q. northropi type material is of 
generalized enough morphology to be near identical to that 
of other giant azhdarchids, such as the overlapping elements of 
the contemporary Romanian giant azhdarchid Hatzegopteryx. This 
being the case, and assuming Q. northropi can be distinguished 
from other pterosaurs (i.e., if it is not a nomen dubium), perhaps 
Hatzegopteryx should be regarded as a European occurrence of Quetzalcoatlus. 
However, Witton et al. also noted that the skull material of Hatzegopteryx 
and Q. lawsoni differ enough that they cannot be regarded as the same 
animal, but that the significance of this cannot be ascertained given 
uncertainty over the relationships of Quetzalcoatlus specimens.[8] 
These issues can only be resolved by Q. northropi being demonstrated 
as a valid taxon and its relationships with Q. lawsoni being investigated. 
An additional complication to these discussions are the likelihood that huge 
pterosaurs such as Q. northropi could have made long, transcontinental flights, 
suggesting that locations as disparate as North America and Europe could have 
shared giant azhdarchid species.[8] Q. lawsoni was found to be a valid taxon 
in 2021, and confirmed to belong to the same genus as Q. nothropi.[1]

An azhdarchid neck vertebra, discovered in 2002 from the Maastrichtian age 
Hell Creek Formation, may also belong to Quetzalcoatlus. The specimen (BMR P2002.2) 
was recovered accidentally when it was included in a field jacket prepared to 
transport part of a Tyrannosaurus specimen. Despite this association with 
the remains of a large carnivorous dinosaur, the vertebra shows no evidence 
that it was chewed on by the dinosaur. The bone came from an individual 
azhdarchid pterosaur estimated to have had a wingspan of 5–5.5 m (16–18 ft).[9]

Description
Size
See also: Pterosaur size

Size comparison of a human to Q. northropi (green) and Q. lawsoni (blue)
When it was first named as a new species in 1975, scientists 
estimated that the largest Quetzalcoatlus fossils came from an 
individual with a wingspan as large as 15.9 m (52 ft). 
Choosing the middle of three extrapolations from the proportions 
of other pterosaurs gave an estimate of 11 m, 15.5 m, and 21 m, 
respectively (36 ft, 50.85 ft, 68.9 ft). In 1981, further 
advanced studies lowered these estimates to 11–12 m (36–39 ft).[10]

More recent estimates based on greater knowledge of azhdarchid 
proportions place its wingspan at 10–11 m (33–36 ft).[8] Remains 
found in Texas in 1971 indicate that this pterosaur had a minimum 
wingspan of about 11 m (36 ft).[11] Generalized height in a 
bipedal stance, based on its wingspan, would have 
been at least 3 m (9.8 ft) high at the shoulder.[3]

Weight estimates for giant azhdarchids are extremely problematic 
because no existing species share a similar size or body plan, 
and in consequence, published results vary widely.[3] Generalized 
weight, based on some studies that have historically found 
extremely low weight estimates for Quetzalcoatlus, was as low as 
70 kg (150 lb) for a 10 m (32 ft 10 in) individual. A majority 
of estimates published since the 2000s have been substantially 
higher, around 200–250 kg (440–550 lb).[12][13]


Skull reconstruction of Q. lawsoni
Skull
Skull material from Q. lawsoni shows that Quetzalcoatlus 
had a very sharp and pointed beak. That is contrary to 
some earlier reconstructions that showed a blunter snout, 
based on the inadvertent inclusion of jaw material from 
another pterosaur species; this material was named as the 
holotype of a genus of short-snouted azhdarchid, 
Wellnhopterus, in 2021.[1] A skull crest was also present 
but its exact form and size are still unknown.[6]